[MNE-27, MKC-1233] ESP-NOW Tutorial (#1401)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-esp32/tutorials/esp-now/esp-now.md

---

> title: ESP-NOW

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Device to Device Communication with ESP-NOW
```

> description: ESP-NOW is a short distance wireless communication protocol develop by Espressive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to use the ESP-NOW protocol to send data between ESP based boards.
```

### Limited Data Quantities 
ESP-NOW is useful when transmitting smaller amounts of data (max 250 bytes). It utilizes action frames for communication. Action frames are specialized data frames that contain information about the action being performed. These frames allow ESP-NOW devices to efficiently exchange data without the overhead associated with more generic data frames.

![Action Frames](./assets/action-frame.png)

### Low Latency
As a result of the limited data quantities and its lightweight design ESP-NOW introduces a low latency, which means that devices can quickly exchange data making it suitable for remote controlling other devices, e.g. a radio car.

## Limitations

### Limited Range 
ESP-NOW has a limited signal range, typically around 220 meters under ideal conditions. The actual range can vary depending on factors like environmental interference, antenna design, and obstacles in the communication path.

### Interference 

> Like other wireless communication technologies operating in the 2.4GHz band, ESP-NOW can be susceptible to interference from other devices and Wi-Fi networks. It's essential to choose communication channels carefully to minimize interference and ensure reliable communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like other wireless communication technologies operating in the 2.4 GHz band, ESP-NOW can be susceptible to interference from other devices and Wi-Fi networks. It's essential to choose communication channels carefully to minimize interference and ensure reliable communication.
```

### No Network Infrastructure

> ESP-NOW is designed for point-to-point and point-to-multipoint communication but doesn't provide the infrastructure for building complex network topologies. If your application requires a network with multiple interconnected devices or internet connectivity, you may need to complement ESP-NOW with additional networking solutions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ESP-NOW is designed for point-to-point and point-to-multipoint communication but doesn't provide the infrastructure for building complex network topologies. If your application requires a network with multiple interconnected devices or Internet connectivity, you may need to complement ESP-NOW with additional networking solutions.
```

### Security Considerations
While ESP-NOW offers some level of data privacy, it may not be as secure as other communication protocols like HTTPS or MQTT with robust encryption. If your project involves sensitive data, consider implementing additional security measures to protect against eavesdropping and unauthorized access.

### No Message Acknowledgment
ESP-NOW does not provide built-in acknowledgment mechanisms for confirming successful message delivery. If message reliability is crucial for your application, you'll need to implement your own acknowledgment and error-handling mechanisms.

### Compatibility
ESP-NOW is primarily designed for use with ESP8266 and ESP32 microcontrollers. While it can be compatible with other ESP32-based devices, it may not work seamlessly with other non-ESP platforms. Compatibility should be considered when designing a system with multiple types of devices.

## Arduino IoT Cloud

Arduino provides their own service for handling wireless communication called Arduino IoT Cloud. You can read more about it [here](https://docs.arduino.cc/arduino-cloud/).

> While the Arduino IoT Cloud offers similar features to the ESP-NOW protocols they are vastly different and should be used for specific usecases. Check the comparison table below for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the Arduino IoT Cloud offers similar features to the ESP-NOW protocols they are vastly different and should be used for specific use cases. Check the comparison table below for more information.
```

> |                     | Arduino IoT Cloud                                                           | ESP-NOW                                                                        |
> |---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | Range               | Depends on internet connectivity, suitable for global reach.                | Approx 220m.                                                                   |
> | Security            | Secure communication with encryption and authentication.                    | Basic security, may need additional measures.                                  |
> | Delay               | Network-related delays due to internet communication.                       | Low latency for local communication.                                           |
> | Data Size           | Unlimited data (min. Entry plan)                                            | max 250 bytes.                                                                 |
> | Device Compatibility| Compatible with various Arduino boards and IoT devices.                     | Primarily used with ESP8266 and ESP32 microcontrollers.                        |
> | Protocol            | Uses MQTT for communication.                                                | Uses a custom ESP-NOW protocol.                                                |
> | Power Consumption   | May consume more power, especially when connected to the internet.          | Known for low power consumption.                                               |
> | Data Processing     | Allows for cloud-based data processing and analytics.                       | Primarily for direct device-to-device communication.                           |
> | Use Cases           | IoT projects requiring global connectivity and cloud-based data management. | Applications needing low-latency, local communication.                         |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                     | Arduino IoT Cloud                                                           | ESP-NOW                                                                        |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Range               | Depends on Internet connectivity, suitable for global reach.                | Approx. 220 m.                                                                   |
| Security            | Secure communication with encryption and authentication.                    | Basic security, may need additional measures.                                  |
| Delay               | Network-related delays due to Internet communication.                       | Low latency for local communication.                                           |
| Data Size           | Unlimited data (min. Entry plan)                                            | max 250 bytes.                                                                 |
| Device Compatibility| Compatible with various Arduino boards and IoT devices.                     | Primarily used with ESP8266 and ESP32 microcontrollers.                        |
| Protocol            | Uses MQTT for communication.                                                | Uses a custom ESP-NOW protocol.                                                |
| Power Consumption   | May consume more power, especially when connected to the internet.          | Known for low power consumption.                                               |
| Data Processing     | Allows for cloud-based data processing and analytics.                       | Primarily for direct device-to-device communication.                           |
| Use Cases           | IoT projects requiring global connectivity and cloud-based data management. | Applications needing low-latency, local communication.                         |
```
